---
title: City Centre
layout: essay
categories: [churchill]
---

Cambridge is a kind of anti-House-of-Leaves[^1]---larger on the outside than the
inside. Viewed on a map, from above, it is all open courtyards and expansive
playing fields, but at street level the city reveals itself as maze of winding
alleys and narrow bridges. The center of Cambridge, where the oldest colleges
sit, is a warren of secret spaces and walled-off greens; public streets make up
just a tiny part of its total area. Untraversable portions of the map exist only
as patches of bright growth glimpsed through narrow archways and snatches of
raucous conversation among gown-clad dons that float (the conversations, not the
dons) through open windows.  Even within college grounds, much space is
impassable. Some lawns may be crossed only by fellows, or on certain days of
the year, or by students who have received certain grades and are wearing
bowties of a certain color.

I spent the last four years on a campus whose every detail had been specified in
advance by an authoritative Architect to whose general color scheme and layout
even the most contrarian modern designers have hewed. Cambridge is very
obviously grown rather than planned; Gothic, Romanesque and Brutalist structures
of all shapes and shades rub shoulders in the same college and sometimes in the
same building. Into facades alternately steel-clad and half-timbered are crammed
wine merchants, vendors of upmarket yoga wear, centuries-old clothiers with
storybook names like "Ede and Ravenscroft", dance clubs, bookstores, cheese
shops. Overpriced sausage and d&ouml;ner carts prey on gullible foreigners
during the day and drunk students at night.

Names advertise that the tenuous confederation called the University of
Cambridge has persisted and will persist long after any of its buildings or
faculties: we have Old Addenbrooke's (once a hospital, now a business school);
the Old Press; the New Museums (more than a century old, and home to the Old
Cavendish and Old Computer Laboratories, each of whose occupants have moved to a
New location in West Cambridge).

The mile and a half from my door to the center of town is a gauntlet of angry
motorists, rash cyclists, cobblestones and incautious pedestrians. I have
already grown to loathe the tourists, who seem to prefer loitering mid-street in
inane conversation [^2] to actually touring the university. On rainy evenings I
am a peril on rickety wheels, whizzing across the slick surface of King's Parade
with my bell continuously dinging. The return to College is better: Townspeople
go to bed early and one can enjoy, for a few minutes, the uninterrupted flow of
freezing air across bare knuckles.

[^1]: Or should that be anti-Tardis? I've neither seen the television series
      nor read the novel.

[^2]: Standing <em>in the center of the intersection</em> in front of the
      [Corpus Clock](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Corpus_Clock): 
      &#8220;&#26159;&#38047;&#21527;&#65311;&#8221;
      &#8220;&#19981;&#26159;&#38047;&#12290;&#8221;
      &#8220;&#26159;&#38047;&#65292;&#26159;&#38047;&#21834;&#65281;&#8221;
      &#8220;&#26159;&#19968;&#20010;&#21160;&#29289;&#38047;&#12290;&#8221;
