---
title: Some things I believe to be true
layout: essay
categories: [misc]
---

I think everyone ought, at some point, to try laying out a comprehensive
philosophy of the world. I don't expect the to succeed, but it's a good
exercise. Beware: this document is evolving, and will at times be incorrect.

## Forms

<p class='sta'>1. Abstract objects exist.</p>

<p class='exp'>When I am totally deprived of sensory information, I still
conceive of symbols and groups of symbols, and rules for transforming these.</p>

<p class='rmk'>We could, of course, dispense with symbols and consider only
groups for the sake of brevity, but this is beside the point.</p>

<p class='rmk'>Mathematics is discovered, not invented. All possible theories
are latent; mathematicians simply choose a region of the space of axioms to
explore, and unwind those axioms.</p>

<p class='sta'>2. Formulate a notion of a model, consisting of (a) a set of
beliefs, (b) a set of rules for manipulating (splitting, combining,
transforming) beliefs, and (c) a rule for testing the consistency of a set of
beliefs.</p>

<p class='exp'>This will be useful for describing my understanding of the
current state of the world.</p>

<p class='ex'>First-order predicate logic, Bayesian reasoning with the obvious
consistency test. Weirder: models with trivial consistency tests.</p>

## Self

<p class='sta'>3. There exists an entity which constructs models. Call it
"myself".</p>

<p class='exp'>Cogito ergo &amp;c.</p>

<p class='sta'>4. This entity has access to a distinguished set of symbols. Call
these "sensations".</p>

<p class='exp'>"Set of symbols" might be too crude a device for describing my
sensations. But I have access to some kind of information which is fundamentally
the same as the information I make up, but marked.</p>

<p class='sta'>5. This entity has access to other distinguished sets of
symbols. Call these "memories".</p>

<p class='rmk'>Which is not to say that I can conceive of all of my memories all
at once! It would be equivalent (information-theoretically but not
computationally) to say that I have access to two labeling functions which tell
me whether a given piece of information is a sensation or memory.</p>

<p class='sta'>6. My sensation is not one of my memories.</p>

<p class='exp'>I think. This probably doesn't matter.</p>

<p class='sta'>7. There exist consistent models which include as axioms my
sensation of the present and my memories. Call this "my model space".</p>

<p class='exp'>I do not know exactly how the world is. It is consistent with
everything I believe that there is and is not a person standing behind the door
to my room; I must consider both of these models as possible. The trivial
consistency test strikes back: it is also possible that the universe does not
adhere to rules of logic, and that things which directly contradict my current
experience of the world are true. (By this I do not mean "my eyes deceive me",
which I can already account for, but rather "there is and is not an elephant
standing on top of me".)</p>

## Time

<p class='sta'>8. There is a mechanism of time which explains the relationship
between my memories and my experience of the present, and there exist models in
my model space which include the mechanism of time.</p>

<p class='offset'>...</p>
