---
title : On the Core Curriculum
layout : essay
categories : [school]
---

Reading the Core Curriculum seems to be, approximately, the cultural equivalent
of turning over a wet log: one returns, after class, to old narratives and
political opinions and finds them crawling with intertext and rotten with hidden
assumptions. LitHum changed the way I read, and CC changed the way I approach
politics. The Core is Columbia's most important institution.[^1] It's an
extraordinary privilege, and an increasingly rare one, to be able to spend as
much time as I have reading classics in fulfillment of an engineering degree,
and it's a testament to the careful design of our program that the same books
are relevant nearly a century after CC was first held.

Yet why, especially given all the present dialog about the tremendous economic
costs of expensive and "useless" liberal-arts programs, bother? Once upon a time
Columbia and its brethren were little more than finishing schools for the upper
classes; in such circumstances this education was necessary because the
cultivation of cultural literacy was the primary purpose of a college, a means
to impress people who had been similarly educated. This has long since ceased to
be the case. Much as we joke that the Core is a training exercise for future
cocktail parties, I've yet to find a moment when a clever citation from the
_Leviathan_ was  called for in conversation.[^2] It is also not the case that
the curriculum is of immediate instrumental value: I don't buy the claim, made
occasionally, that forcing scientists to take the Core makes them better
scientists. The _Origin of Species_, the only real scientific text on the
syllabus, and _The Human Condition_, the text most directly concerned with the
implications of the scientific worldview, both lead to fascinating discussions
that were nevertheless totally unconducive to an understanding of scientific
subject matter.

But science is no longer enough. To be in any position of leadership, whether
that of the politician, the investor, or the principal investigator, demands a
thoughtfulness and an ethical sensibility that technical training cannot
provide. I was a little put off, when I applied, by the SEAS literature's claim
to produce "engineering leaders", but I think there's something important under
the buzzspeak. If all you want to do is build bridges, this course of study is
completely superfluous; if you want to do more, it is indispensable.

The format is just as important as the subject matter: it's interesting to note
that the Global Core, which most closely resembles distribution requirements at
other schools, is also regarded (at least among everyone I've talked to about
it) as the curriculum's greatest disappointment. My general impression is that
even the people who complained most vocally about LitHum and CC miss the
intimacy and the focus of their seminars once they're over. Indeed, the only
people consistently happy with the Global Core are those who satisfy the
requirement with classes deliberately modeled after LitHum or CC: Columbia is
full of enthusiastic supporters of Nobility & Civility but not many of "Music of
Southeast Asia". It's not that lectures aren't useful---there's a reason
they're the primary vehicle of instruction, even at Columbia---but I've found
that in the handful of humanities lectures I've had, I tend to develop a solid
understanding of the two or three texts I write essays about, and not much else.
Being forced to give an oral defense of your interpretation, twice a week, does
wonders for understanding.[^3]

There's no doubt that we pay a price for the program---organization of the
128-ish seminars making up each semester's worth of LitHum and CC classes is
both logistically and financially ruinous, and one wonders how many of the
problems with student life at Columbia could be rectified if the time and money
devoted to the Core were otherwise spent.[^4] But it's a price decades of
Columbians have determined is well worth paying, and one that I'm happy to share
in. My lasting memory of this school will be of the seminar table.

[^1]: There was a time, before New York became a desirable place to live and
Columbia began to provide reasonable private-college amenities like dormitories
and advising, when it was in fact the only compelling reason to come.

     While I'm obviously pleased to see our reputation improve (and watch the
corresponding plummet in acceptance rates), there's a part of me that's sad to
see that distinction vanish as we grow, in all respects, more and more like our
peer institutions. It's particularly alarming to see the HYP from my application
days swell into CHYPS (a discovery made during an embarassingly long trawl
through collegeconfidential.com prompted by a stray Bwog link)---it's
inconceivable that one person could seriously want to go to all five, and I fear
that our inclusion in the group marks the beginning of our transformation into
an undifferentiated symbol of status. I imagine the sweet spot was probably the
few years before I arrived, during which time we were selective but not
prestigious, but I don't actually know whether the student experience then was
better.

[^2]: Certain after-parties of the Philolexian society possibly excepted.

[^3]: And in those weeks when you haven't done the reading, wonders for your
capacity to bullshit. It's certainly possible to survive the Core without
reading a single book---indeed, some instructors [encourage
it](http://www.culpa.info/professors/84)---but I managed to do about 80%
without too much pain. I still seriously regret not staying up the extra couple
of hours to finish <del>Mill</del> (finally read "On Liberty") and Ibn Khaldun.

[^4]: Hence the now-infamous McKinsey report's advice that Columbia shore up its
endowment by doing away with the Core altogether.
