---
title : On community, administration and mental health
layout : essay
categories : [school]
---

Much has been made, this year, of the <s>apparent</s>[^1] mental health crisis
at Columbia. It's true the school is a great deal more stressful than is
typically recognized (certain [questionable
surveys](http://www.thedailybeast.com/galleries/2010/03/29/2011-s-most-stressful-colleges.html)
notwithstanding)---six-course semesters, regarded as an unreasonable workload at
most schools, are standard fare for our engineers; the reading lists for LitHum
and CC are (I'm told) also exceptionally long.

And it's true that unlike MIT (which, _pace_ _Beast_, appears to be the most
stressful academic environment in the country) Columbia has historically
provided little assurance to students that their feelings of psychological
exhaustion are normal, and that it's acceptable to relax once in a while. We're
left to discover this on our own, and some people never do.

But---and this is where I take issue---it's widely claimed that the stress issue
has its root in a broader lack of "community" on the campus. (A certain editor
of the Spectator, famously insistent that "Columbia community" was a
contradiction in terms, forbade the two words from appearing next to each other
in print.) Columbia, the common wisdom goes, is a graduate school funded by
undergraduates; it ensures only that its undergraduates are happy enough that
they do not become sick or dead and stop paying tuition. If we had only gone to
Princeton we would have had eating clubs to make us feel special; if we had only
gone to Yale we would have spent all our days wrapped in the warm embrace of a
residential college, happy and loved and well....

This is a caricature of collegiate social institutions, and its conclusion is
wrong. The problem of stress, at least, rather comes from the community---from
the endless discussion of thesis word counts and club commitments, and from the
ritual exam-time greeting that goes "Oh, you only have _k_ midterms? I have
_k_+2." More generally, I am unconvinced that forced bonding activity is a
remedy for alienation: it is hardly the case that there are no opportunities to
form relationships here (witness the number of people whose social circles
groups are formed on CO&Ouml;P or during orientation week alone), and if I am
only capable of maintaining friendships with ten people it does little good to
place me in a room with a hundred more.

Why, then, demand a house system (or a mandatory meal plan, or any other kind of
synthetic community)? So we can play juvenile pranks with furniture from distant
buildings? So that we can throw large parties with university funds, at which we
will stand in a corner and talk with four people? This obsessive turning-inward
of the campus attention seems like a profoundly dangerous thing---a giving-in to
the fantasy that all the best things in the world are found within the ivory
tower, and that we owe the development of our character and our reputation
exclusively to our alma mater. A university, and an elite university in
particular, has a responsibility to direct its focus outwards. Columbia, I
think, succeeds in this; whether it does so as a result of neglect rather than
deliberate choice is unimportant.

The omphaloskeptical mindset is good for at least one thing: attracting
donations from alumni. A pattern among Bwog commenters, after expressing disgust
at their treatment by Columbia, is to announce that Columbia doesn't deserve a
cent of donation money from alumni. This, too, is wrong. We should give,
precisely in order to prevent Columbia from becoming the sort of place that has
to convince students that it is the entire world in order to keep the doors
open.

---

Update: Lucy makes a smarter (and certainly more important) point than the one I
was originally intending to make: that the university's cultivation (or
non-cultivation) of a "campus community" does not change the fact that we have
an individual obligation to look out for the people around us.

[^1]: On a second reading, this "apparent" strikes me as deeply insensitive.
Regardless of where it comes from or whether it is endemic to Columbia, the
psychological environment is very real.
