---
title: City of Images
layout: essay
categories: [churchill]
---

<img src="attachments/london-3.jpg" />

We've come to London, at a friend's urging, to watch the world's "7<span
class='ord'>th</span> best" DJ (what kind of standards authority could possibly
issue such a ranking?), but have arrived early for a day of museum visits. The
Klein and Moriyama photography exhibition at the Tate is breathtaking and
exhausting.[^1] It is already dark, but still hours before the show, when we
step out into the cheerful corridor of pop-up Christmas shops along the Thames;
it is decided to enjoy, in turn, the National Portrait Gallery and beer.  The
gallery's parade of scientific and political luminaries, smiling condescendingly
in glossy dinner jackets, is enough to make a comfortable pale-skinned graduate
student who has never known a day's involuntary privation nostalgic for the lost
glory of Emprie. The one-legged man in a filthy army coat crying out below
Charing Cross destroys all nostalgia.

The tube stop nearest the club is called "Elephant and Castle". Arriving
aboveground, we discover a bar or Thai restaurant named "Elephant and Castle" in
the ground floor of a gloomy Cold-War apartment building.  Plaques outside
announce that the Elephant and Castle was a historic theater rebuilt as a public
house in the eighteenth century, and again in the nineteenth; they offer no
insight into the provenance of the current establishment. Inside are
tropical-print wallpaper, thumping dancehall music, green-tea scented candles,
weak beer, comfortable sofas, antique side tables, and men with neck tattoos.

<img src="attachments/london-5.jpg" />

The last club I visited was a glossy shoeboxlike enclosure containing roughly a
hundred fifty MIT students and one Canadian hip-hop sensation and former child
actor. The Ministry of Sound is a cavernous, multi-room affair with security
guards who stick their hands deep into your pants in search of drugs, bottomless
laser-lit haze and bone-rattling speakers which stretch from ceiling to floor.
It is thrilling and disorienting to find one's body transformed into a
percussion instrument, thin skin wrapped around a column of air vibrating
hideously.

In a place as concerned with appearances as music---one or two small pyramids
might have been built with the labor expended in toning the thousand biceps
swelling in time against designer T-shirts---I feel slightly absurd dressed for
a museum outing. From my position near the back of the room the 7<span
class='ord'>th</span> best DJ in the world is invisible for most of the show. We
are treated instead to a video montage of storm troopers having their eardrums
blown out and the DJ being famous on more photogenic stages. The dance floor is
claustrophobic and there is little space for dancing beyond a futile crustacean
twitching of the forearms and shins. On our right is a party of baby-faced,
reddening Koreans in Oxfords and checked shirts; on our left a woman, face
creased deeply with age, twitching with poignant feeling, alone.

<img src="attachments/london-4.jpg" />

At four in the morning we stumble out of the club. We're hungry and promptly
swindled by a nearby kebab shop. We spend the next half hour wandering slowly
through windy, desolate Southwark, eventually descending out of the cold into a
tube station just as the first birds wake in the skeletal trees and the
underground grumbles to life. At eight we collapse in North London, rising in
the early afternoon to watch the light die behind stained glass at Westminster
evensong, with vision still barred black by the flash of remembered strobe
lights.

[^1]: The Kleins are better. The show is encyclopedic, with (several!) complete
books of photographs sliced down the spine and splayed along a wall. I regard
this as irresponsible curation.
