---
title : In which we eat a goat
layout : essay
categories : [columbia]
---

(Or, "In which I unsucessfully attempt to derail my roommates'
[blog](http://allovernewyork.blogspot.com/) with a guest post".)

<p class='offset'>There is a form of magnetism peculiar to booth seats in
restaurants. As children, on a rare night out for spaghetti or ice cream, we
would run squealing toward the periphery of the cafe, vaulting onto our elevated
thrones of sticky red plastic. Now, serious adults though we are, we find
ourselves irresistably drawn toward the banks of fused seating at the
restaurant's back.</p>

We continue to refer to this trip as our goat-eating expedition long after it
becomes clear that this is not the season in which (as a friend has promised)
one can order the whole animal spit-roasted, to be slowly dismembered over the
course of a leisurely meal. We have no need for carcasses; Bay Ridge is exotic
enough.

We emerge, after an hour-long train trip and a brief walk through a subway
station whose grimy blue and white wall tiles recall a YMCA swimming pool, into
the warm evening. We turn toward the first Arabic sign we see, only to discover
that it marks a sad-looking shisha bar filled with listless teenagers. Bab
Al-Yemen is across the street, its signage disappointingly Latinate and its
windows papered with glowing reviews from the Times and the New Yorker---a
reminder that we are not enacting that Manhattanite's dream of playing Cabrillo
to some outer borough's neighborhood restaurant, but merely following a crowd.

Bab al-Yemen has three booths. The first is already colonized by our
dopplegangers, a pod of four twentysomethings carrying a map and a page of
downloaded reviews. The last is unoccupied but adorned with a curtain which, we
observe under our breath, is probably intended for men who wish to conceal their
wives from the other restaurant-goers. We chose the middle.

This, we quickly discover, is comically narrow. We are forced to slowly and
methodically slide ourselves into the seats, interleaving legs, elbows and table
struts and, realizing that we are expected to eat with our hands, to unfold
ourselves again, toddling one-by-one to the washroom for a vigorous scrubbing.

The menu, English <span class='foreign'>recto</span> and Arabic <span
class='foreign'>verso</span>, seems to consist almost entirely of slabs of
chicken and lamb simmered at great length in various more or less
indistinguishable sauces. We chose randomly, but incorrectly: the kitchen has
run out of our first choice, and our second, and our third. We eventually allow
the waiter to order for us.

The food arrives first as four bowls of unasked-for soup which look like
lemonade and taste like flesh; next as a stack of tumescent flatbreads; finally
as endless plates of egg and stew and pilaf for whose wild polymorphism the menu
has left us unprepared.

We burn our fingers, submerging them in still-bubbling cast iron pots as we try
to dip our bread. We muddy our soup bowls, polluting them with stray pieces of
meat and albumen which drop from our unexpert fingers. If there is a graceful
way of eating rice with one's hands, we do not discover it---instead stuffing
contorted fists full of oily grains directly into our mouths. 

Everything is delicious. We eat until we are full, and then order another piece
of bread and keep eating.
