---
title : New Yorker Science Fiction Issue
layout : essay
categories : [reading]
---
Just finished the latest <cite>New Yorker</cite>, dubbed "The Science Fiction
Issue". What struck me (other than the really phenomenal collection of personal
reflections from sci-fi authors of repute they managed to assemble[^1]) is how
little science fiction the issue actually contains. The four fiction pieces--by
_NYer_ regulars Lipsyte, Lethem, Egan and D&iacute;az--all take place in the
future, but a passing reference to self-aware military drones or eyeball-cameras
does not science fiction make. Sci-fi is "fiction in which ideas play an
important part"[^2]; this is what makes _Quicksilver_ a work of science fiction,
though it's set in the 18th century, and D&iacute;az's story a work of "regular"
fiction (if such a thing may be said to exist), though it's ostensibly set late
in the 21st. Indeed, none of the pieces, with the possible exception of
Lethem's, had anything to do with ideas; technology was used for stylistic
(Lipsyte), atmospheric (D&iacute;az) and even formal (Egan) purposes, but never
as subject matter.

Which is not to say that the writing in this issue wasn't uniformly
excellent--it's just disappointing that the _New Yorker_ made no real attempt to
do justice to the genre, or look outside its usual stable of writers, in
assembling it.

[^1]: A highlight: Ursula LeGuin has a short story accepted to Playboy, on the
condition that she not reveal she's a woman--but then they ask for an author
biography! Her solution? "It is commonly suspected that the writings of U. K.
LeGuin are not actually written by U. K. LeGuin, but by another person of the
same name."

[^2]: Neal Stephenson, quoted in Levy, Stephen, "A Quicksilver Mind", Newsweek
142 (13).
