---
title: Vocame cum benedictis
layout: essay
categories: [churchill]
---

The Queens' chapel is tall and narrow. From where I sit during rehearsals I can
barely make out "SANCTUS SANCTUS SANCTUS DOMINUS DEUS SABAOTH" stencilled below
the vaulted ceiling. A green carpet leads between wooden choir seats
to a green altar; in front of us are embroidered kneeling-pillows (green), 
ancient copies of the Book of Common Prayer with Latin dedications from alumni
hand-pencilled into their front leaves, detritus from the inside of the chapel
choir's pockets and a green-and-white scarf abandoned by some congregant early
in the term.

Rehearsals themselves are much as I remember from my four-month run as a
vocalist in high school: brief calisthenics, embarassing exercises (scales on
"Popocatepetl, copper-plated kettle"; "I know a man with a ping pong ball" to
the tune of <cite>William Tell</cite>) and then the music. MagSoc's usual fare
seems to be the standard big-chorus repertory of masses and intermittent
Messiahs; this term we are performing a somewhat more obscure setting of the
<cite>Requiem</cite> by Saint-Sa&euml;ns, to be incongruously preceded in
concert by his <cite>Carnival des Animaux</cite>.

Our conductor is a Queens' student, a manic chemist with a lovely counter-tenor
and a musical director's fondness for exaggerated displays of emotion. My fellow
choristers are, in about equal proportion, musical incompetents like myself,
singers in serious choruses here for extra practice, and more mature members of
the university who have outgrown other groups. Like many choirs without the
luxury of choosing their own membership, the Chorus of the St. Margaret Soceity
of Queens' College is rather heavy on basses and altos. Attendance wobbles
throughout the term and quality varies non-monotonically.

I've befriended a small group of other graduate students in the choir. At break
(bland biscuits and the intolerably sweet beverage the British refer to as
"squash") we make template small talk about weather, thesis progress, the dearth
of tenors, college food. After five minutes our leader or or one of his
harried-looking accompanists summons us back to the chapel. Last week we resumed
with the sixth movement: "Sanctus--sanctus--sanctus...."
