---
title: Sofia
layout: essay
categories: [churchill]
---

Fragments:

- Every closed space in this city breathes cigarette smoke: the cab from the
  airport, elevator cars and stairwells of the conference center, church
  vestibules.

<!-- more -->

- It's a strange building, this National Palace of Culture. Presentation rooms are
  numbered non-monotonically (6 on the ground floor, 3 somewhere in the middle and
  10 on top), and not all staircases lead to all floors. The conference organizers
  have sealed a random subset of the building's numerous identical smoked-glass
  doors---at one point I find myself face-to-face with another attendee, each of
  us trying to pass to the other's position but separated by a lock. A
  wrong turn leads down a dim corridor of refrigeration equipment and
  scratched-in Communist graffiti; this ends in yet another locked door and I'm
  eventually forced to return to the bottom of the Palace, cross to a different
  staircase, and ascend to my destination. Several rooms are decorated with
  monumental Riveraesque murals to Slavic strength and perseverance, white slides
  on point processes and max-margin models bordered by weeping mothers and men
  impaled against crosses of steel.

- Pop music is universal, but the songs beggars sing in subway stations have the
  character of locality.

- I don't think I've ever eaten so much cheese in my life: soft, salty and
  white. If it can't be topped with cheese, food is smothered in yogurt.

- Sofia is a shabby city---spray-painted Cyrillic, sickles and swastikas cover even
  the nicer shopping districts, and feral cats pace loose paving stones in broken
  sidewalks---but its shabbiness is the shabbiness of an old wardrobe or scuffed
  couch: the result of use, rather than neglect; comfortable. The streets are
  clean. On weekends the residents, like Mediterraneans, sip beer in outdoor
  cafes and sweet water from public fountains, as the concrete city decays
  around them.
