---
title: Mayhem
layout: essay
categories: [churchill]
---

Champagne immediately, then cocktails. Gin and tonic four ways, a disco in a
sixteenth-century courtyard, roast hog, standup, grilled kangaroo, barbershop,
Cabernet, cabaret, Stilton, bumper cars.  Broken glass underfoot, vomit in the
Hall, strings of guests, green and stooping, up the winding staircases to the
toilets off New Court. Flashbulbs, fireworks, and the distant splash of
spectators' punt poles under the Bridge of Sighs. "Dancing in the Moonlight",
crooned by the chapel choir at dawn's first breaking.

But all this comes later. I spend the first six hours of the St. John's College
May Ball assembling glass tumblers with three ice cubes, twenty milliliters of
Jack Daniel's, and Coca-Cola poured to fill three quarters of the remaining
volume.[^1] Though the bar is positioned near the entrance to the ball, I'm
spared the initial press of guests, who arrive with hands already occupied by
glasses of bubbly. They eventually return to the Backs for the pyrotechnics
and immediately thereafter begin their assault. I am everywhere sticky with
whiskey. At some point in the evening flies, attracted by the light in the tent,
commit mass suicide in our ice bukets; I quickly rearrange the lamps and change
the ice.

It is a relief, at one o'clock, to shed my sweat-soaked shirt and muddy pants
and don a clean tuxedo---to metamorphose from insect-scabbed worker to elegant
guest. Champagne immediately.

***

Class distinctions are thrown into sharper relief by formalwear. Across
demographics at Cambridge, clothes worn day-to-day seem to come from the same
handful of stores.[^2] Only when everyone's in a tuxedo is it easy to identify
the students who grew up in them: French cuffs and silk scarves, or, on the
other end, clip-on bowties and polyester suits. The balls are also among few
occasions in Cambridge where the split between server and client doesn't follow
the town--gown line---here students clean up after students, tourists and
productive members of society consigned to shake heads or snap photos from
behind a chain-link fence.

The scandalized treatment of May Week in the popular English press seems to
derive from two sources: the outrageous price of ball tickets (John's started at
&pound;310 a pair), and general booze-fuelled disorderliness on the part of the
guests. The second of these seems to be less in evidence than on an average
Cambridge Friday night; as for the first I suspect Columbia spends about the
same _per capita_ on Bacchanal and related expenses (though it hides the cost
better). But the ball---pink floodlights on ancient ivy, midnight string
quartets---nonetheless seems to be a unique kind of scandal: that these
students, already so favored over their peers, should also be allowed to
celebrate the end of exams in this fashion; or that the citizens of Cambridge,
uninvited, should for a week endure rock concerts in the dead of night without
complaint. Guilt seasons the kangaroo burgers. Attendance is
transgressive---this is part of the thrill.

***

Owing to the extreme latitude, the sky has already begun to lighten by three.  I
am miraculously wide-eyed---thanks, no doubt, to the fortifying effects of the
cappucino stand in Chapel Court. The various entertainments change so frequently
that one is assured unrelenting novelty simply by strolling back and forth along
the major axis of the college. I remember music, mostly, and food---song on
clear voices from all directions, the crackle of a particularly crispy fragment
of hog, the dull bell-chimes of bottles against wine glasses filled to
overflowing.

This goes on for hours more.  We miss breakfast and make our way to the bleary
fringes of the survivors' photo, then stagger past the morning press of
commuters on Madingley Road, home, to sleep.

[^1]: One of these disorienting cultural minutiae---the beverage is referred to here as a "JD and Coke" rather than a "Jack and Coke".

[^2]: Except for the handful of minor European aristocrats who wear three-piece-suits everywhere.
