---
title: Lents
layout: essay
categories: [churchill]
---

Five minutes before the getting-on race, the coach of the Clare boat set to
start behind us walks over, trailed by the yapping dog that follows him on all of
the crew's outings. He announces that he has a "particularly meaty group of
boys" this year, that he expects to overtake us on the reach, and that we should
be prepared to follow his instructions from the bank to ensure the safety of his
crew as they pass. Unsure quite how respond to such brazenness, we sit mutely in
our parked boat. After he turns around I mutter something about drowning the
dog. Shortly thereafter the dog falls into the water and has to be rescued, the
race begins, Clare fails to overtake, and we qualify for the Lent Bumps.

The first day we row over. The lead-up to the race progresses much faster than I
expected: nerves contract the apparent passage of time between the muffled thud
of the four-minute cannon and the one-minute. I'm so impressed by the sight of a
row of boats being synchronously poled out to the end of taut chains that I
nearly miss the thirty-second warning. The slide to front stops at twelve, the
square at eight, the check at five and the starting cannon all seem to happen
simultaneously.

We gain half a length on Darwin II, and our first whistle, almost immediately.
We raise the pressure, hoping to overtake quickly, but progress no further; less
than a kilometer into the race Darwin overtakes the Emmanuel boat they've been
chasing, and we're left frustrated and spent with half the course still to go.
I've experienced few things more excruciating than that final push, utterly
wasted by the initial sprint but forced to keep rowing in order to hold our
station.

Our rivals from Clare (this rivalry may be entirely one-sided but by now we
despise the coach enough to make a tradition of it) bumped on day one, and start
immediately behind us the second day. We know we can catch Emma faster than
Darwin did, so the day's task is to bump them before Clare bumps us. We resolve
to make it a short race, and hold the rate perilously high after the initial
windup. Immediately we get one whistle, then two, then three. Our form
disintegrates, and for a terrible moment it looks like Emma will slip away. But
fifteen more seconds of half-crazed wrenching at the oars ends the whistling,
and we arrest ourselves midstream as Clare coach and Clare pooch whiz by
screaming expletives.  We limp to the side of the river, drop our blades, and
cheer. The coaches rip ivy from the side of the tow path and we wrap ourselves
in it, rowing home wreathed in a parody of laurels.

As a spectator on Grassy Corner I can't believe I'm watching the same sport.
The wait between each of the three guns drags on, and after the final
cannon-blast nothing happens. Slowly, the sound of bank parties disentangles
itself from the rumbling of traffic on the motorway bridge, then builds, then
bursts into a roar as boats and bicycles materialize suddenly around the bend in
the river. There's a minute or two of perfect madness as coaches scream by,
boats couple and separate and frantic blades send fountains of water into the
air. Then, as quickly as it began, it ends. The surface of the stream flattens
and the sound dies away as the race moves on down the river.

The next day disaster strikes: as we begin to pull away from our opponents, a
complicated sequence of events near the front of the boat results in the
bodily ejection of one of our rowers. Facing the other way, I see
nothing---there's a jolt, then a head in the water, then panicked shouts of
"hold it up!" The Emma crew, only inches from being bumped by Clare, is awarded
a technical bump against us and we return to the previous day's starting
positions.

We never recover, and shortly after the beginning of the fourth race Clare bumps
us.
