---
title: Hall
layout: essay
categories: [churchill]
---

Dinner begins with a gong, a shuffling into the hall and a frantic scrambling
for seats in good company, a pause with heads bowed as the fellows arrange
themselves at the high table, and a grace. Servers materialize and vanish with
finicky appetizers and dirty dishes; with corkscrews for the wine we've carried
in and mops when we spill it.

There are minor variations among the colleges: at Homerton the gong is replaced
by a bell; at Churchill only the high table is expected to wear gowns; at
Queens' the grace is a dense paragraph of Latin, and at Trinity requires the
involvement of two tables; at Robinson (godless and anarchic) there is neither
high table nor grace. St. Cat's serves cheese, many colleges have a sherry
course, and Pembroke is known, from time to time, to produce meals cooked
_sous-vide_.

Pennying, though technically forbidden, is frequent (particularly at boating
events). Diners come armed with pockets full of copper coins, the distribution
of which (and the forced drinking that accompanies it) is governed by numerous
ancient rules. I had a particularly nasty introduction to the engineer's penny,
which, folded in half with a pair of pliers, fits easily into the mouth of a
wine bottle.

On special occasions at Churchill booze from the college cellars flows freely:
champagne before dinner, white wine with the first course and red wine with the
second, port and claret[^2] with dessert, sometimes Madeira and whisky
subsequently in the SCR or Fellows' Dining Room.[^3]

At "common tables", when the fellows dine below, the master leads the after-meal
toast: "To Her Majesty the Queen! To our founder, Sir Winston!" Otherwise we
wait until after the high table has retired to the SCR[^1], at which point an
undergraduate initiates. Sir Winston gets the first place.

[^1]: At UK schools with college systems, membership is divided into a JCR (for
undergraduates), MCR (for postgraduates) and SCR (for fellows). CR stands for
"common room", except at Cambridge, where it stands for "combination room",
except at Churchill, where it stands for "common room". These acronyms also
designate the physical spaces in which the respective bodies meet.

[^2]: "English" for Bordeaux.

[^3]: Invitations to the SCR and FDR have lately been restricted in the
aftermath of an overly-festive post-dinner drinking session which imperiled a
Warhol print and several historic pieces of furniture in the College's
possession.
