---
title: The Low Countries
layout: essay
categories: [churchill]
---

The streets of Mechelin ring hourly with the chimes of bells in tall towers, but
the city is crumbling: the cobbled streets are buckled and full of holes, eroded
brick drips from tilting Gothic facades. We have beer at Het Anker, then drive
through a series of small Belgian towns on the way to Westmalle Abbey. The abbey
is closed to visitors, but after a sandwich and beer at the attached restaurant
we walk through the nearby fields as the sun goes down.

<img src='../attachments/holland-1.jpg'>

We walk through Amsterdam the next morning in a haze (atmospheric, not
pharmacological). Crooked canalside buildings loom in the haze and trams ring
distantly as they cross water. In the afternoon, after a quick meal in an
Indonesian luncheonette, we enter an unassuming brick church with an astonishing
green interior, painted minutely on every surface and terminated with an
outrageous Baroque altar that, for once, doesn't look too extravagant for the
structure that contains it.

Next day: the Stjendal museum, a brief and frigid meal in the open air, a
long walk to the transplanted van Gogh museum, The Potato Eaters, The Yellow
House, Sunflowers, Cypresses and Two Women, coffee, rijsttafel, beer.

The following day we drive to Utrecht and walk canalside. Lunch is sandwiches
which, with alarming similarity to sandwiches we ate in Morocco, take nearly 45
minutes to prepare and nearly make us late for an afternoon beer tour. We throw
change on the table and break the speed limit on the way to the abbey, arriving
just in time. After the tour ends we attend vespers inside the abbey: monks in
cream-colored habits gather, chant simply but mostly sit in silent meditation.
We arrive in Liege around nightfall.

We begin the next day wandering through the ruins of the old abbey at Orval.
After another slow lunch of sandwiches (at this point in the trip we swear off
ordering them ever again), we sprint to La Chouffe just in time
for yet another tour. Afterwards we wander through the woods nearby, which are
rich with the smell of manure from nearby fields and acidity of pine trees. Our
hostel is a little enclave of Flemish expatriates in the heart of Wallonia, and
at night Dutch-speaking locals crowd the bar and jabber animatedly at the
proprietor.

<img src='../attachments/belgium-1-hdr.jpg' class='inline'>

<img src='../attachments/belgium-4.jpg'>

Little figures of the crucifiction or the Piet&agrave; are scattered throughout
the countryside.  We arrive early in Rochefort, where a monk inside the
gatehouse waves at us, then returns to his reading without responding to our
gestures in the direction of the door. We head to Chimay, where the fat monk by
the entrance is more than happy to open up. We wander through a abbey graveyard,
a neat grid of identical crosses.

We take a brief detour through France, where another beermaker has agreed to
open up his brewery (a large shed in his backyard) for us even though it's the
weekend. The large shed is jammed with brewing apparatus, crates of beer,
bottling and labeling machines. We talk hop and malt choices, lament Europeans'
limited tolerance for bitterness, poke at his computer, then drink.

<img src='../attachments/belgium-7.jpg'>

Next we drive to Watou, where we settle in to a palatial (and empty!) country
house meant to hold a busload of beer tourists visiting St. Bernardus. We cycle
to nearby town on unreliable bikes provided by the guesthouse operators (mine
has a flat tire) and nearly initiate a diplomatic incident when we fail to order
drinks with our dinner. The guesthouse provides beer---unlimited, free and high
in alcohol---and we spend the rest of the evening haphazardly attempting to
catch up on work while we sample everything that St. Bernardus has ever brewed.

We arrive at Westvleteren precisely on time for our 10 o'clock appointment, but
a monk shoos us away from the entrance of the abbey: they have no beer today.
There's some to drink in the shop, so we order and savor slowly (it is, after
all, before lunch).

Bruges is warm, with red window casings, red brick and orange streets at sunset.
We are given a tour of the Halve Maan brewery by a miserably unhappy tour guide
(the facilities are fascinating) at Halve Mann, and spend the evening in the
hostel trying to fend off attempts at conversation by a drunk Vancouverite who
doesn't understand why people here aren't treating him with more respect ("after
all, the Canadians liberated this place!").

Brussels is a real city, dirty and urban, with anarchist slogans spraypainted in
three languages on soot-covered neoclassical monuments. We order a heaping plate
of grilled fish for a few Euros a person in an Arab neighborhood, and manage to
visit two more beer bars. Finally, full and drunk with a week's worth of Belgian
beer, we prepare to head home.
