---
title: The Spirit Jar
layout: essay
categories: [churchill]
---

CUMS has organized a social outing at the University Zoological Museum (the New
Museums Site, much to my surprise, actually has them). The museum is housed in
the ground floor and basement of one of the Site's numerous concrete cubes; a
skeleton whale (theatrically floodlit by the beginning of our evening visit)
hangs suspended over the entrance. Inside are even more skeletons: pangolins and
giraffes, primates of all shapes, impossibly delicate hummingbids. More
exciting, perhaps, are the boards of skewered insects and spirit jars filled
with flaccid fish and cephalopods, many prepared by Darwin (a fanatical
beetle-collector in his undergraduate days).

After pacing the galleries, flourescent, empty and echoing after hours, we are
conducted into the storage rooms where the museum keeps items too precious,
delicate or mundane to display. One of the numerous refrigerators, we are told,
contains a recently-deceased rhinocerus cut into thin sections. The rooms are
packed with beautiful wooden drawers full of of the "skins", preserved but
unmounted, that department zoologists use in their studies. Our guide says these
resemble socks with faces. On a desk someone has left a whale aorta as large as
a dinner plate in cross-section; a neatly-lettered label on a nearby box
describes its contents as "dried stomachs, intestines, &c." Eventually we're
taken to the real treasures: a complete (although composite) dodo skeleton,
acquired by way of a familial relation between the museum director and the
governor of Mauritius, and a cabinet housing a great auk, a passenger pigeon and
various other specimens whose species recently suffered the same fate.

We have dinner at a nearby restaurant which resembles Symposium on 113th in
every single aspect.
