---
title: Cam and Granta
layout: essay
categories: [churchill]
---

The river acquires a new name at the Anchor, shedding "Granta" and becoming
"Cam" as it flows past the punt hires and under the Silver Street Bridge.
Upstream and southwest, it traces a lazy route towards the shady apple orchards
of Grantchester. It's a popular route---Bertrand Russell paced it out
religiously, Wittgenstein made the voyage by canoe, and even today one
inevitably crosses paths with a familiar fellow or Nobel Laureate, shoes caked
with mud, on the way to a cup of tea or a pint at the Green Man.

Immediately below the Silver Street crossing, even on frosty days, the river
carries a steady traffic of punts. Blanket-swaddled Chinese families listen in
shivering silence as punt chauffers lie exuberantly about Cambridge's buildings
and bridges: the Mathematical bridge, held up without nails; the Clare bridge, a
section missing from one of its posts; the bridge at Magdalene which gives the
city its name.

Further downstream the river makes a gentle right, drifting past the
multicolored boathouses of Cambridge---Goldie and Caius in antiseptic green,
Jesus with its boxy clock tower, Clare Hall tacked like a doghouse to Clare's
side, the hideous aluminum shed called Combined---before continuing on toward
its distant terminus at King's Lynn.

In months of rowing we have seen the Cam in all her moods: when, bloated with
rainwater, she tugs at the rolling boathouse doors; when, on windy days, small
waves on her surface break backwards and show her flowing in the wrong
direction; when, at dawn's first breaking, she wreaths herself in a delicate
pink haze, coal-smoke and the grumbling of barge people. On icy mornings we
glide through silent compaines of mute swans, our blades balanced and feathered,
hovering expectantly over the river's glassy surface.

Water follows us: to our hostels, where sopping fleece and lycra drip puddles on
our floors; to nine-o-clock lectures on quantum computation where the stink of
the Cam, barely masked by spray-on antiperspirant, lingers above the chalky
desks.
