---
title: IIT is probably not falsifiable
layout: essay
categories: [mind]
---

The most important part of Koch's <cite>Concsiousness: Confessions of a Romantic
Reductionist</cite> comes near the end, when he suggests an experimental test of
the so-called "Integrated Information Theory". Per Koch, a conscious experience
is determined by the complete state space of the system that describes it as
well as the individual state currently occupied; thus, the experience of being a
brain with a large population of neurons deactivated should should be
qualitatively different from being a whole brain, even when those neurons are
not actually being used.

There are numerous difficulties that arise here, but I want to address
specifically the claim that the procedure suggested above---knock out an unused
chunk of brain and ask the patient if anything has changed---is, as Koch claims,
a test of IIT.
The problem is that a negative result _doesn't_ disprove the theory. In IIT, as
in every reasonable theory of mind and human biology we have, the contents of
memory are propositional rather than subjective. If my subjective experience of
the colors red and blue were interchanged, I would not be suddenly startled to
find the sky a different color---the color would change in all my memories as
well. So too for Koch's test subject, who, with a piece of her brain frozen,
would have no way to remember what it used to feel like, and would consequently
report no change.

Indeed, a positive result would support claims much, much stronger than the ones
Koch is making: either that qualia are somehow encoded directly in the grey
matter (so that it's possible to read off my experience of red or pain directly
from the structure of my brain), or there exists in consciousness a kind of
"memory" of past states which is independent of the memory that neurons record.
So this is ultimately a test of a different theory (and indeed one with no
proponents).
