---
title: Bells and bells
layout: essay
categories: [berkeley]
---

Apparently "campanophile" is the word for what I've become, though it's the rare
campanophile with proficiency on no kind of bell instrument. My first
introduction to Cambridge ringing began, of all places, at a happy hour with
Googlers in New York. Someone on my team was carrying on about the exceptional
bells in his Harvard dorm. "If you think that's unusual," muttered our resident
Englishman, "let me tell you about the bells at Cambridge."

I will not, here, attempt to explain the finer points of English change ringing,
noting only that the storytelling advantages afforded by practicing in an
11th-century structure traditionally associated with the inventor of the
discipline are outweighed by the frustrations of a creakily-hung set of bells.
After a term of nearly-weekly practice I was barely able to ring a single chime
on a regular interval. My only attempt at real method ringing, a handbell
practice during Lent term, was disastrous.

Method names---stately Cambridge Court Bob Royal, pornographic Reverse
Canterbury Pleasure Place Doubles, inexplicable Plastic Swan Slow Course
Minor---are a continuous source of amusement.

The west coast has limited opportunities for change ringing, and the Bay Area
none; since returning to the states I've instead had to take up a rather
different sort of ringing, operating clappers and keyboards rather than ropes
and wheels. Carillon music is a more refined, less muscular practice; harder to
get wrong but harder to make musical. I stumbled at the beginning of my final
performance of the semester---it seems somehow worse than making an error in an
ordinary recital, when your error is broadcast to every uninvited listener
within a mile's radius; but correspondingly more satisfying to recover and make
the hills ring with evening music.
