---
title: For those in peril on the sea
layout: essay
categories: [berkeley]
---

I am barrelling dry-eyed down 81, listening to _Spem in Alium_, the sun in my
face.

I am determined to have Fun on this trip, coming up for air after a stressful
conference, hopping from friends' beach house to townhouse in the sunny
East.

Andrew died. Several days ago, actually; suicide by means I haven't yet learned
and can't bring myself to ask. I discover this when I open Facebook, trying to
make Fun plans for New York, finding that I've been invited to join a group
whose name begins "In loving memory...".

It's late, all the lights off and the house asleep, after a long cab ride, plane
ride, bus ride, train ride, drive through sleeping Rockport and Gloucester; a
thimbleful of rye on the back patio, watching the lobster traps bob in the cove
below, and the stars.

I knew Andrew for a little more than a year, and not well enough (evidenced, at
the very least, fact that I find his self-erasure totally incomprehensible---the
experience is less of grief than of reading a book with missing chapters, or a
proof with missing steps). He was singular, a dynamo, radiant in his ambition. I
have only meories of him at parties in East Campus, jabbering animatedly (Gogol?
The electoral system?), emphatic up-and-down motions of his short arms, and a
handful of invitations I missed by a thousand miles. For years, when people have
asked how I liked college, when I have said "oh, you meet the most incredible
people", I have seen his face....

The Island is like a Rockwell painting---the hard coast too comfortably craggy,
the sunset too pink, the wood vaults and granite towers and long lawns of this
house too perfect, too perfect. And I am having Fun, of a refined, restorative
sort, the sort involving the _Atlantic_ on the beach and expensive bottles of
wine and unexpectedly long voyages in boats.

It seems like there should be a lingering discomfort at the base of my neck, a
_memento mori_ with an easily-retrieved proximate cause. In fact for much of the
trip I am blissfully unconscious of anything other than the salt spray and the
rough stone under my feet, the paddle-ache in my shoulders. The remembrance,
when it comes, is a catch in the throat, a tension at the edge of the eyes,
departing as easily as it came.

I didn't make much of an effort to keep in touch with Andrew after graduation. I
can't help but think (perhaps just by way of self-justification) that this is
because he was so luminous, so obviously going to Become Someone, that I felt
assured of finding him whenever I needed him.

So here I am, with this bus and this highway and this Tallis Scholars album,
having Fun and trying over-earnestly to meditate on Andrew's memory like Donne
before his portrait. And all I can think of, other than that Andrew was a swell
guy and that I miss him terribly, is that the satisfaction this song and this
Connecticut countryside give me (a catch in the throat, a tightness at the eyes)
are no less accidental than his bewildering accident---a biochemical fluke---a
handful of ions enough to make self-preservation a joy or a horror, make flesh
into dew.

It's been a long time since I listened to this song. The final cadence never
resolves, lingering, open.
