A gong summons us to dinner.

There are minor variations among the colleges: at Homerton the gong is replaced
by a bell; at Churchill only the high table is expected to wear gowns; at
Queens' the grace is a dense paragraph of Latin; at Robinson (godless and
anarchic) there is neither high table nor grace. St. Cat's serves cheese,
Trinity has a sherry course, and Pembroke is known, from time to time, to
produce meals cooked _sous-vide_.

At "common tables", when the fellows dine below, the master leads the after-meal
toast: "To Her Majesty the Queen! To our founder, Sir Winston!" Otherwise we
wait until after the high table has retired to the SCR[^1], at which point an
undergraduate leads the toast. Sir Winston gets the first place. (On
Thanksgiving I was volunteered to give a third toast to the President of the
United States.)

On special occasions at Churchill libations flow freely: champagne before
dinner, white and red wine with the meal, port and claret[^2] with dessert,
sometimes Madeira and whisky subsequently in the SCR or Fellows' Dining
Room[^3].

[^1]: At UK schools with college systems, membership is divided into a JCR (for
undergraduates), MCR (for postgraduates) and SCR (for fellows). CR stands for
"common room", except at Cambridge, where it stands for "combination room",
except at Churchill, where it stands for "common room". These acronyms also
designate the physical spaces in which the respective bodies meet.

[^2]: "English" for Bordeaux.

[^3]: Invitations to the SCR and FDR have lately been restricted in the
aftermath of an overly-festive post-dinner drinking session which imperiled a
Warhol print and several historic pieces of furniture in the College's
possession.
