---
title: The "Integrated Information Theory" of concsciousness is probably not falsifiable
layout: essay
categories: [mind]
---

The most important part of Koch's <cite>Concsiousness: Confessions of a Romantic
Reductionist</cite> comes near the end, when he suggests an experimental test of
the so-called "Integrated Information Theory". Per Koch, a conscious experience
is determined by the complete state space of the system that describes it as
well as the individual state currently occupied; thus, the experience of being a
brain with a large population of neurons deactivated should should feel
different from being a whole brain, even when those neurons are not actually
being used.

There are, of course, numerous difficulties that arise here, but I want to
address specifically the claim that the procedure suggested above---knock out an
unused chunk of brain and ask if it feels any different---is, as Koch claims, a
test of IIT.

In particular, a negative result _doesn't_ disprove the theory. In IIT, as in
every reasonable theory of mind and human biology we have, the contents of
memory are propositional rather than subjective. If my subjective experience of
the colors red and blue were interchanged, I would not be suddenly startled to
find the sky a different color---the color, as remembered, would change in all
my memories as well. So also Koch's test subject, who, with a piece of her brain
frozen, would have no way to remember what it used to feel like, and
would consequently report no change.

Indeed, a positive result would support claims much, much stronger than the ones
Koch is making: either that qualia are somehow encoded directly in the grey
matter (so that it's possible to read off my experience of red or pain directly
from the structure of my brain), or there exists in consciousness a kind of
"memory" of past states which is independent of physical memory.

Such a result would be astonishing, and seems correspondingly unlikely. But a
negative outcome wouldn't answer any new questions.
