Walking past the Strand with Leah in falling snow.

Grad night---drunk in the courtyard of SIPA, on the roof of Mudd.

After senior dinner, stuffed with wine and steak, looking out on campus from the
roof of Butler.

Looking out on the city from the top IAB during Annual Dinner.

My first Philo meeting, only a couple of weeks into freshman year, in the
basement of St. Paul's.

WLF in the Low Rotunda.

Coney Island with John and Adam. Adam befriends a middle-aged woman on the
cigarrette-littered beach.

Hustling through Times Square in a suit on my way to a DE Shaw interview.

Rockets in Van Cortlandt park.

Running through the rain after Annual Dinner, then suddenly realizing the flasks
are missing and running back to UTS to search for them.

My last Orgo night, then midnight breakfast, then dancing with the Band as
papers rain down in the Hewitt courtyard, then Sans Souci on the steps of
Furnald.

Late nights in the Butler Catalog Room, or curled up in a Butler armchair with a
CC book.

Somehow slipping into a bar full of i-bankers in the Village with Lety and
Jessie---my first New York bar.

Hookah with Lety in Riverside Park; Leah's panic.

Frank Redner's tarot readings at Philo afterparties.

Seminars and cheese in Ilya's suite.

Endless plays with Richard and Leah.  Leah's horror at my initial boredom during
our interminable after-meal conversations.  My horror at the interminable
after-meal conversations.  My gradual warming-up to Richard.  Reciting Hamlet
monologues in Junior's over liver and cheesecake.

Commune seders, Commune Thanksgivings, Commune sea-chanty parties. Singing Joe
Hill at the top of our lungs.

Dequan charming TV cameras at FIRST competitions.

Being woken up in the morning by Adam to escape from Boston a day before the
Snowpocalypse.

Omar's advances on Lety in Egypt.

Barbeque and rye in Williamsburg for someone's birthday.

Over martinis, in a UES hotel bar, the engagement bet with John and Adam.

The dead mouse in McBain which I mistook for Andrei's air freshener.

The last night of sophomore year: drinks in our room, then a sailing party.
Andrei walking me home, barely able to stand up. Waking up very early the next
morning and discovering a hallway filled with garbage and projectile vomit, a
meeting with Chris Wiggins, breakfast with Leah and Steve, then waking up to
move John's couch---first unsuccessfully up three flights of stairs, and
eventually to the fraternity house.

The little heathen Christmas party.

Jazz with Lety at Small's, the Vanguard. Buying wine for Claire at the Vanguard,
beer for Rebecca at Fat Cat.

Endless bickering over Rebecca and Zoe's baking.

Amir's show at the Jazz Gallery and in the East Village.

Attempted bar crawl through the LES in freezing cold; escaping first to a vegan
bar and then to one consisting entirely of concrete surfaces.

Walking to Math in falling snow.

Sitting at the table in Bilgrami's office.

Shopping for grocieries in Adam's rental car senior year; the coroner's report.

The Ruggles toaster.

Andrei & family organizing the furniture.

The voyage with Andrei to Queens for Romanian Pastries.

Mixed doubles and some more famous (but less interesting) match at the US open.

Mexican in Jackson Heights.

Chanukkah at Ron's; sitting around arguing about Ahmadinejad afterwards.

Looking through old marching band scripts with Ben Caimano and friends.

Launching New Culpa with Ron from the IAB lobby.

40s on 40: glass bottles on Low Plaza.

Hot weather at Bacchanal. Brief trip to LES for sushi, then rush back to campus.
Ron on Subway. Drunk in public.

Running around the reservoir in the rain.

The reservoir in fall. Buildings rising up over either side of the woods.

Walking through Central Park in the snow.

The central park Christmas market.

125th street at night, bustling with street vendors and music.

Buying a belt for Mock Trial on 125th, no tax.

Staying up late arguing with Raul over evolution, abortion.

Raul's plopping noises.

Physics problem sets on whiteboards in the JJ6 lounge. Late night chicken
fingers from JJ's place.

Math with dry erase markers on Ilya's windows in Hartley.

The mouse (& mousetrap) in Hartley.

Walking through Wein reciting poetry in the run-up to Kilmer.

Camping out in the NLP lab while Feni's inspectors were visiting, to make the
space look like it was being used.

Horrible cocktail paraties with the Engineering Alumni and Columbia Club.

Concerts in the Casa Italiana, covered in Roman decorations.

Avery: cool darkness, tall windows, wood panels, perfect silence.

Coming out of Butler at sunrise.

LitHum: Diotima's ladder, staring out the window toward symposium, Molly reading
Greek.

CC: The Catholic mafia, James' awkwardness, the Republic.

Interactions between science whiskey and hot cesium sources with John.

Falling asleep in early morning chemistry lectures in 209 Havemeyer. Warmth,
Flynn's unsteady grip on his pointer.

Gulati's theatrics.

Fire in McBain.

COOP.

Orientation events---party in the Met. Alone in the gallery with the book of the
dead. Later met trips, wandering through the greek & roman statues.

Early during freshman year, trip to MoMA. Adam appoints himself leader; I resent
it.

Rainy days at MoMA.

Sapporo ramen.

Ippudo ramen, Minca ramen, the ramen under the elevated subway tracks.

Our "date restaurant", Asean in the village.

Sticky fingers at fatty crab.

Special occasions at L'Ecole.

Dinners with the Kuerbitzes---Gotham, a French restaurant in midtown. Caviar,
endless bottles of (outrageously expensive) red wine. John underdressed. My
awkwardness at trying to avoid the floury bits during Passover.

Sitting on benches in Washington Square park, in the cold, fingers covered in
hot sauce.

Christmas with the Kuerbitzes. Up late watching some black & white Christmas
movie, then episodes of "Always Sunny". Their generosity. Some complicated duck
preparation for dinner.  Leah tells me to read "A diamond the size of the Ritz".
Allowed to come so that they didn't havve to invite Grandma (my failure to
realize this as a joke; subsequent discomfort; subsequent guilt over
discomfort).

The return---woken up in the morning, a day early, told to pack & head to the
bus. Run by a pair of Orthodox Jews, who apologize for the snow the whole way
home. 8 hour ride, but we're the last bus to make it out of Boston.

Snow three feet deep on the ground at Columbia. Trek to Vine in the blizzard.

Attempts to make it to the airport the next day. All the subways closed above
ground, no buses running, no taxis. Train to Jamaica station, in hopes that an
airtrain replacement has been put in place. Couple across from us doesn't
realize closures. We agree to split a cab with them. Aboveground, we hail a cab.
Couple gets in, drives off without us. We finally find another enterprising
citizen who's running people to the airport on his own (for a handsome profit).
Great conversation---turns out he used to work in the MechE lab, knows Bob.
Along the way we pass our former travel companions: their cab has stalled.

The circuit around the insie of St. John the Divine.

Reading Woolf in the courtyard by the ugly statue at St. John.

Drunkenly spinning the tooth statue on Ancell Plaza.

Working outside on a table in the Van Am quad. Father playing bocce ball with
5-year-old son. For points! Initial horror when kid asks if they can not play
for a score anymore & father refuses, but by the end of an hour kid's playing
has improved dramatically.

Organ concerts at St. Paul's all to myself.

Drag Claire to Chinatown for grocery shopping when she visits. Lunch from Xian,
searching for bajiao and huajiao in the big supermarket. Practicing my Chinese.

Xian trip with Z+R, Tucker. Rats in the park.

Watching bike polo players in the Chinatown park.

Chinese New Year's celebrations. Lion dance. Searching for egg custards for
Leah.

Running into Owen at the Egg Cream & Egg Custard festival in Chinatown.

Shopping for woks & knives at kitchen supply stores on the park, in the Bowery.

The smell of Chinatown.

Rainy day noodles at Food Shing.

Walks from campus to chinatown.

Lying on the South Lawn arguing about hypothesis testing with Ben and Aditya.

Paying pennies for washing & drying in John Jay. Bruised fingertips.

Jordan's disastrous "under the sea" party upstairs. Water pouring through the
light fixture in our bathroom after their toilet floods.

Thanksgiving in the tape-decorated suite.

Late-night MT classes in Mudd.

Advising meetings with Mike at Max SoHa.

NLP happy hours at Greenwich Treehouse, the Abbey. Arguing with Jenny Finkel
(about what?).

Outrageously expensive cider at the Abbey. Nearby Japanese restaurant that was
probably a drug front.

Pumpernickel and plain cream cheese from Absolute. Not toasted.

MOCK TRIAL

MICROSOFT

GOOGLE

ISI

FIRST
